1) Coursera - https://www.coursera.org/
Coursera is a free learning site that offers MOOCs courses from well-known universities. All Coursera courses contain pre-recorded video lectures that you can watch when it is convenient for you.
Coursera has programs together with universities that allow you to get a master degree or specializations. You can explore various college courses without any hassle.
This site is offering free programs from accredited institutions. The courses available on such platforms are designed by a leading university.
2) Udemy - https://www.udemy.com/
Udemy is an online platform that helps you to create courses for categories like business, design, marketing, etc.
You can develop new skills and achieving their goals by learning from the extensive library of various courses. Subjects that are available in Udemy are taught by expert instructions.
The outline of courses can be viewed on all devices connected to the internet. You do not require any prequalification to take any course.
3) Edx - https://www.edx.org/
Edx is one of the best free online courses provider. It offers university-level courses in varieties of disciplines. You can browse various subjects like Computer science, language, data science, engineering, and more.
This site contains a weekly subject sequence. It includes a short video with learning exercises. The platform provides video tutorials, which are similar to the on-campus discussion group and a textbook. It has an online discussion forum where students can post the questions to teaching assistants. It offers certification completion.
4) Udacity - https://www.udacity.com/
Udacity online teaching platform helps you to create courses on numerous categories like development, business, design, marketing, etc.
Courses that are available in Udacity are taught by expert instructors. Students can also develop new skills and achieving their goals by learning from the extensive library of various courses.
Udacity offers good quality courses. It helps you to prepare for the interview. This site provides the assistance of a mentor.
5) LinkedIn Learning - https://www.linkedin.com/learning/
LinkedIn Learning is a website that offers video courses that are taught by experts. You can use this website to access up to 15,000 courses in more than seven languages available both for free and with a subscription.
LinkedIn free courses give you a chance to learn from industry experts without spending a dime. These LinkedIn training courses are perfect for beginners, intermediate learners, and experts. LinkedIn Learning courses with certificates are available in various categories such as business, personal development, entrepreneurship, design & tech online courses.